








  LOVE SONNETS OF AN
  OFFICE BOY




  [Illustration]




  Love Sonnets of an
  Office Boy

  By
  Samuel Ellsworth Kiser

  Illustrated by
  John T. McCutcheon

  Forbes & Company
  Boston and Chicago
  1902

  _Copyright, 1902_
  BY SAMUEL ELLSWORTH KISER

  Published by arrangement with
  THE CHICAGO RECORD-HERALD

  Colonial Press: Electrotyped and Printed
  by C. H. Simonds & Co., Boston, U.S.A.




  LOVE SONNETS OF AN
  OFFICE BOY




  I.


  Oh, if you only knowed how much I like
    To stand here, when the "old man" ain't around,
    And watch your soft, white fingers while you pound
  Away at them there keys! Each time you strike
    It almost seems to me as though you'd found
  Some way, while writin' letters, how to play
    Sweet music on that thing, because the sound
  Is something I could listen to all day.

  You're twenty-five or six and I'm fourteen,
    And you don't hardly ever notice me--
    But when you do, you call me Willie! Gee,
  I wisht I'd bundles of the old long green
    And could be twenty-eight or nine or so,
    And something happened to your other beau.




  II.


  I heard the old man scoldin' yesterday
    Because your spellin' didn't suit him quite;
    He said you'd better go to school at night,
  And you was rattled when he turned away;
    You had to tear the letter up and write
  It all again, and when nobody seen
    I went and dented in his hat for spite:
  That's what he got for treatin' you so mean.

  I wish that you typewrote for me and we
    Was far off on an island, all alone;
  I'd fix a place up under some nice tree,
  And every time your fingers struck a key
    I'd grab your hands and hold them in my own,
  And any way you spelt would do for me.




[Illustration]




  III.


  I wish a fire'd start up here, some day,
    And all the rest would run away from you--
    The boss and that long-legged bookkeeper, too,
  That you keep smilin' at--and after they
  Was all down-stairs you'd holler out and say:
    "Won't no one come and save me? Must I choke
    And die alone here in the heat and smoke?
  Oh, cowards that they was to run away!"

  And then I'd come and grab you up and go
    Out through the hall and down the stairs, and when
    I got you saved the crowd would cheer, and then
  They'd take me to the hospital, and so
    You'd come and stay beside me there and cry
    And say you'd hate to live if I would die.




[Illustration]




  IV.


  Yesterday I stood behind your chair
    When you was kind of bendin' down to write,
    And I could see your neck, so soft and white,
  And notice where the poker singed your hair,
  And then you looked around and seen me there,
    And kind of smiled, and I could seem to feel
  A sudden empty, sinkish feelin' where
    I'm all filled up when I've just e't a meal.

  Dear Frankie, where your soft, sweet finger tips
  Hit on the keys I often touch my lips,
    And wunst I kissed your little overshoe,
  And I have got a hairpin that you wore--
  One day I found it on the office floor--
    I'd throw my job up if they fired you.




  V.


  She's got a dimple in her chin, and, oh,
    How soft and smooth it looks; her eyes are blue;
    The red seems always tryin' to peep through
  The middle of her cheeks. I'd like to go
  And lay my face up next to hers and throw
    My arms around her neck, with just us two
    Alone together, but not carin' who
  Might scold if they should see us actin' so.

  If I would know that some poor girl loved me
    As much as I do her, sometimes I'd take
    Her in my arms a little while and make
  Her happy just for kindness, and to see
    The pleased look that acrost her face'd break,
  And hear the sighs that showed how glad she'd be.




  VI.


  When you're typewritin' and that long-legged clerk
    Tips back there on his chair and smiles at you,
    And you look up and get to smilin', too,
  I'd like to go and give his chair a jerk
    And send him flyin' till his head went through
  The door that goes out to the hall, and when
    They picked him up he'd be all black and blue
  And you'd be nearly busted laughin' then.

  But if I done it, maybe you would run
    And hold his head and smooth his hair and say
    It made you sad that he got dumped that way,
  And I'd get h'isted out for what I done--
    I wish that he'd get fired and you'd stay
    And suddenly I'd be a man some day.


[Illustration]




  VII.


  If I was grown to be a man, and you
    And all the others that are workin' here
    Was always under me, and I could clear
  The place to-morrow if I wanted to,
  I'd buy an easy chair all nice and new
    And get a bird to sing above your head,
    And let you set and rest all day, instead
  Of hammerin' them keys the way you do.

  I'd bounce that long-legged clerk and then I'd raise
    Your wages and move up my desk beside
    Where you'd be settin,' restin' there, and I'd
  Not care about the weather--all the days
    Would make me glad, and in the evenings then
    I'd wish't was time to start to work again.




[Illustration]




  VIII.


  This morning when that homely, long-legged clerk
    Come in he had a rose he got somewhere;
    He went and kind of leaned against her chair,
  Instead of goin' on about his work,
  And stood around and talked to her awhile,
    Because the boss was out,--and both took care
    To watch the door; and when he left her there
  He dropped the flower with a sickish smile.

  I snuck it from the glass of water she
    Had stuck it in, and tore it up and put
    It on the floor and smashed it with my foot,
  When neither him nor her was watchin' me--
    I'd like to rub the stem acrost his nose,
    And I wish they'd never be another rose.




  IX.


  Yesterday I watched you when you set
    There with your little lunch-box in your lap;
    I seen you nibble at a ginger snap,
  And wished that where your lips had made it wet
  I'd have a chance to take a bite and let
    My mouth be right where yours was before;
  And after you had got your apple e't,
    And wasn't lookin', I picked up the core.

  I pressed my mouth against it then, and so
    It seemed almost the same as kissin' you,
    Your teeth had touched it, and your red lips, too,
  And it was good and tasted sweet, and, oh,
    I wished you'd bring an apple every day
    And I could have the cores you'd throw away.




  X.


  I wish, when you was through your work some night
    And goin' home alone, and had your pay
    Stuck in your stockin'--what you drew that day--
  A robber'd come along with all his might
  And you'd be nearly scared to death, and right
    There in the street you'd almost faint and say:
    "Good robber, please don't hurt me--go away!"
  And as he grabbed you then I'd come in sight.

  I wish I'd be as strong as two or three
    Big giants then, and when I handed one
    Out to him he'd be through, all in, and done,
  And then you'd look and see that it was me,
    And, thinkin' of the great escape you had,
    You'd snuggle in my arms and just be glad.




[Illustration]




  XI.


  Her brother come this morning with a note
    What said that she was home and sick in bed;
    She's got an awful bad cold in her head--
  They think it might run into the sore throat,
  And oh, what if she'd not come back again,
    And they would get some other girl instead
    Of her to typewrite here, and she'd be dead?
  I wouldn't care no more for nothin' then.

  I wish I was the doctor that they'd get,
    And when I'd take her pulse I'd hold her hand
  And say "Poor little girl!" to her, and set
  Beside the bed awhile and kind of let
    My arm go 'round her, slow and careful, and
  Say, "Now put out your tongue a little, pet."




  XII.


  She's back to work again; I'm awful glad;
    When she was sick it seemed to me as though
    The clocks all got to goin' kind of slow,
  And every key she pounds looked kind of sad.
    It's tough to have to hear her coughin' so--
  I wish that I could take her cold and she
    Would know I took it, and not have to blow
  Her nose no more, and be as well as me.

  She takes some kind of cough stuff in a spoon,
    I seen her lickin' it this morning when
    She took a dose and put it down again,
  And when the rest went out awhile at noon
    I got her spoon and licked it, and it seemed
    As though it all was something nice I dreamed.




  XIII.


  Last night I dreamed about her in my sleep;
    I thought that her and me had went away
    Out on some hill where birds sung 'round all day,
  And I had got a job of herdin' sheep.
  I thought that she had went along to keep
    Me comp'ny, and we'd set around for hours
    Just lovin', and I'd go and gather flowers
  And pile them at her feet, all in a heap.

  It seemed to me like heaven, bein' there
    With only her besides the sheep and birds,
    And us not sayin' anything but words
  About the way we loved. I wouldn't care
    To ever wake again if I could still
    Dream we was there forever on the hill.




[Illustration]




  XIV.


  This morning when we come to work I got
    Jammed in the elevator back of you, and there
    They made you stick your elbow in me where
  The mince pie lands; the lunch that I had brought
    Was all smashed flat, but still I didn't care;
  You leaned against me, for you couldn't stand
  Because the ones in front were crowdin', and
    My nose was pressed deep into your back hair.

  I wish we'd had to go ten times as high,
    Or else that we'd be shootin' upward yet,
    And never stop no more until we'd get
  Away above the clouds and in the sky,
    And you'd lean back forevermore and let
  Your hairpins always jab me in the eye.




  XV.


  When her and me were here alone, at noon,
    And she had bit a pickle square in two,
    I set and watched and listened to her chew,
  And thought how sweet she was, and pretty soon
  She happened to look down at me and say:
    "You seem so sad, poor boy; what's wrong with you?"
    And then I got to shiverin' all through
  And wished that I was forty miles away.

  I tried to think of some excuse to make,
    But something seemed all whirly in my head,
    And so the first blame thing I knew I said:
  "It's nothin' only just the stummick ache."
    Sometimes I almost wisht that I was dead
  For settin' there and makin' such a break.




  XVI.


  Last night I heard Jones astin' you to go
    To see the opery next Thursday night,
    And you said yes--and he'll be settin' right
  Beside you there all through the whole blamed show,
  And you'll be touchin' him with your elbow,
    And mebby he'll say things that tickle you
    And buy a box of chock'luts for you, too,
  And I'll not be around nor never know.

  I wish I'd be the hero on the stage,
    And you was the fair maiden that got stoled,
    And he would be the villain that would hold
  You frettin' like a song-bird in its cage--
    And then I'd come along and smash him one,
    And you'd say: "Take me, dear, for what you done."




[Illustration]




  XVII.


  When I was dustin' off her desk one day,
    And she was standin' there, I took the pad
    She writes on when she gets dictates and had
  A notion to tear off a leaf and lay
  It up against my heart at night, when they
    Was something made her come to where I stood
    And say, "Poor boy," as softly as she could--
  It almost seemed to take my breath away.

  That night I couldn't sleep at all becuz
    The thoughts about them words that she had said
    Kep' all the time a-goin' through my head
  With thoughts about how beautiful she wuz,
    And then I knowed she loved me, too, or she
    Would not of cared how hard I worked, you see.




  XVIII.


  I'd like to have a lock of her brown hair,
    For that would be a part of her, you know;
    And if she'd tie it with a little bow
  Of ribbon, then I'd fasten it somewhere
  Clear down inside, next to my heart, to wear,
    And fix it over every week or so,
    When I changed undershirts, or maw she'd go
  And raise a fuss because she found it there.

  One day when bizness wasn't on the boom
    She trimmed her finger-nails, and one piece flew
  To where I was, almost acrost the room;
    I watched the spot where it went tumblin' to,
  And now a piece of her is mine; it come
  Right from the end of her dear little thumb.




  XIX.


  I wish, some day, when she's typewritin' and
    I've took a note out for the boss somewhere,
    They'd be some outlaws sneak in here and scare
  That long-legged clerk to death and then the band
    Would steal her, and nobody else would dare
  To try to save her, and they'd run away
    To where they had their cave, and keep her there,
  And ast more for her than her folks could pay.

  Then I would get a gun and bowie-knife
    And take the name of Buckskin Bob or Joe,
    And track them to their den, and then I'd go
  A-galley whoopin' in, and save her life,
    And she would say: "My hero's came at last!"
    And we'd stand there and hold each other fast.




[Illustration]




  XX.


  Last night, when she'd got on her coat and hat
    And felt her dress behind and then her hair,
    To see if everything was all right there,
  She stopped and said: "Well, now just look at that!"
  And then put out one foot a little bit,
    And says: "Ain't that provokin'? I declare,
    The string's untied!" She put it on a chair,
  A-motionin' for me to fasten it.

  So then that long-legged clerk he pushed me back
    And grabbed the shoe-strings that were hangin' down--
    I wish I was the strongest man in town--
  Oh, wouldn't I of let him have a whack!
    And I'd of kicked him so blamed hard I'll bet
    He'd wonder what he might come down on yet.




  XXI.


  My darling, often when you set and think
    Of things that seem to kind of bother you,
    You put your pencil in your mouth and chew
  Around the wood, and let your sweet teeth sink
  Down in it till it's all marked up and split,
    And yesterday I seen you when you threw
    A stub away that you'd bit up; it flew
  Behind the bookcase, where I gobbled it.

  I put it in my mouth, the way you'd done,
    And I could feel the little holes you made--
    The places where your teeth sunk in--I laid
  My tongue tight up against them, every one,
    And shut my eyes, and then you seemed to be
    There with your lips on mine and kissin' me.




  XXII.


  When I was tellin' ma, two days ago,
    About our beautiful typewriter girl
    She dropped the dough and give a sudden whirl
  And said: "She's twic't as old as you, you know--
  She must be twenty-five or six or so.
    Don't think about her any more, my dear,
    And you and me'll be always happy here--
  Besides, she's nothing but an old scarecrow."

  It made me sad to hear her talk that way;
    My darling's just a little girl almost--
    I can't see why ma give her such a roast,
  And I could hardly eat my lunch next day,
    For every time I took a bite of bread
    I almost hated ma for what she said.




[Illustration]




  XXIII.


  The other day a rusty pen got stuck
    Away deep in her finger, and she held
    Her poor, dear little hand up then and yelled
  For me to hurry over there and suck
  The poison out, and when I went I struck
    My toe against the old man's cuspidor
    And rolled about eight feet along the floor
  Before I knew what happened, blame the luck!

  When I set up and looked around, at last
    That long-legged, homely clerk was there, and so
    He had her finger in his mouth, and, oh,
  I'll bet you I'd 'a' kicked him if I dast!
    I never seen the beat the way things go
    When there's a chance for me to stand a show.




  XXIV.


  That homely clerk took her out for a ride
    Last Sunday in a buggy, and they rode
    Around all through the parks; I wisht I'd knowed
  About it, and the horse would kind of shied,
  And then got scared and run and kicked, and I'd
    Of been a piece ahead and saw him jump
    And leave her hangin' on alone, the chump,
  And she'd of been so 'fraid she'd nearly died.

  Then I'd of give a spring and caught the bit,
    And landed on the horse's back, where all
  The people there could see me doin' it,
    And when I got her saved the crowd would call
    Three cheers for me, and then she'd come and fall
  Against my buzzum, and he'd have a fit.




  XXV.


  I don't care if she's twic't as old as me,
    For I've been figgerin' and figgers shows
    That I'll grow older faster than she grows,
  And when I'm twenty-one or so, why, she
  Won't be near twic't as old as me no more,
    And then almost the first thing that she knows
    I might ketch up to her some day, I s'pose,
  And both of us be gladder than before.

  When I get whiskers I can let them grow
    All up and down my cheeks and on my chin,
    And in a little while they might begin
  To make me look as old as her, and so
    She'd snuggle up to me and call me "paw."
    And then I'd call her "pet" instead of "maw."




[Illustration]




  XXVI.


  One morning when the boss was out somewhere
    And when the clerk was at the bank and me
    And her was here alone together, she
  Let out a screech and jumped up in the air
  And grabbed her skirts and yelled: "A mouse!" And there
    One come a-runnin' right at her, and, gee!
    They wasn't a blame thing that I could see
  To whack it with, except an office chair.

  I grabbed one up and made a smash and hit
    Her desk and broke a leg clear off somehow,
  And when the boss came back and looked at it
    He said that I would have to pay, and now,
  When ma finds out I know just what I'll git--
    Next pay-day there will be an awful row.




  XXVII.


  It's over now; the blow has fell at last;
    It seems as though the sun can't shine no more,
    And nothing looks the way it did before;
  The glad thoughts that I used to think are past.
  Her desk's shut up to-day, the lid's locked fast;
    The keys where she typewrote are still; her chair
    Looks sad and lonesome standin' empty there--
  I'd like to let the tears come if I dast.

  This morning when the boss come in he found
    A letter that he'd got from her, and so
  He read it over twice and turned around
    And said: "The little fool's got married!" Oh,
  It seemed as if I'd sink down through the ground,
    And never peep no more--I didn't, though.




  XXVIII.


  The chap's a beau we didn't know she had
    He come from out of town somewhere, they say;
    I hope he's awful homely, and that they
  Will fight like cats and dogs and both be sad.
  But still there's one thing makes me kind of glad:
    The long-legged clerk must stay and work away,
    And, though he keeps pretendin' to be gay,
  It's plain enough to see he's feelin' bad.

  I wish when I'm a man and rich and proud,
    She'd see me, tall and handsome then, and be
    Blamed sorry that she didn't wait for me,
  And that she'd hear the people cheerin' loud
  When I went past, and down there in the crowd
    I'd see her lookin' at me sorrowf'ly.




[Illustration]




  _Now in Press_

  Ballads of the Busy Days

  BY S. E. KISER

  Price, $1.25

  FORBES & COMPANY, PUBLISHERS

  BOSTON AND CHICAGO




  A CHARMING ROMANCE

  BUELL HAMPTON

  By WILLIS GEORGE EMERSON

  A tale of love, of surprises, of a mystery


  "'Buell Hampton' is a strong and original story."--_Philadelphia North
  American._

  "It is a good story in every particular. Nothing better has been done
  in its line."--_The Mirror_ (_St. Louis_).

  "One of the leading books of the year. Every page breathes; is alive
  with people who do things and say bright and witty things."--_Chicago
  Journal._

  "As a distinctly American novel, 'Buell Hampton' has, for abundance of
  thrilling incident and pure interestingness, no superior."--_Albany
  Times-Union._

  "Many a year has passed since so strong, so bright, and so clever a
  novel as 'Buell Hampton' has made its appearance. There are no dull
  patches in it. Every page is filled with dewy freshness."--_Opie
  Read._

  _Printing choice and binding handsome. Price, $1.50_

  FORBES & COMPANY, PUBLISHERS

  BOSTON AND CHICAGO




  _Now in Twentieth Thousand_

  BEN KING'S VERSE


  If I Should Die To-Night

        If I should die to-night
  And you should come to my cold corpse and say,
  Weeping and heartsick o'er my lifeless clay--
        If I should die to-night
  And you should come in deepest grief and woe
  And say, "Here's that ten dollars that I owe"--
        I might arise in my large white cravat
        And say, "What's that?"

        If I should die to-night
  And you should come to my cold corpse and kneel,
  Clasping my bier to show the grief you feel--
        I say, if I should die to-night
        And you should come to me, and there and then
  Just even hint 'bout payin' me that ten,
        I might arise the while;
        But I'd drop dead again.

                             (_From "Ben King's Verse."_)


  "'Ben King's Verse' will be appreciated by all who enjoy good
  things."--_John Kendrick Bangs._

  "Ben King's verses may be recommended to those suffering from
  melancholy."--_The Chicago Daily News._

  "Lovers of real poetry and of quaint, whimsical humor will treasure
  'Ben King's Verse' as a volume which can be read and re-read with
  pleasure, a companion for all moods and times."--_The Journalist_
  (_New York_).

  _Beautifully made. 292 pages. Price, $1.25_

  FORBES & COMPANY, PUBLISHERS

  BOSTON AND CHICAGO




  Popular Humorous Verse

  By NIXON WATERMAN

  In Merry Mood,--A Book of Cheerful
  Rhymes

  A Book of Verses

  "Nixon Waterman needs no introduction to the American public. One of
  our most natural and musical singers, his verses have been quoted in
  every newspaper in the land, and have gone straight to the heart of
  the great army of 'just common folks.' He is always an optimist. The
  world is better--both happier and better--for such verses as these of
  Nixon Waterman."--_Chicago Record-Herald._

  _Price, each, $1.25_


  By FRED EMERSON BROOKS

  Pickett's Charge and Other Poems

  Old Ace and Other Poems

  "Fred Emerson Brooks is a great poet and a genius of great ability.
  Humor and pathos abound throughout his poems, and many partake of the
  inspiration of the war-drum, but he is thoroughly at home in whatever
  strain of melody he chooses to adopt."--_Atlanta Constitution._

  _Price, each, $1.25_


  FORBES & COMPANY

  P. O. BOX 1478
  BOSTON, MASS.

  P. O. BOX 464
  CHICAGO, ILL.




TRANSCRIBER'S NOTES:

  Text in italics is surrounded by underscores: _italics_.





