






 Transcriber's Notes: In the original, it is difficult to ascertain
 whether a given page break is also a stanza break. Judgment has been
 applied. Original italics are marked herein with underscores, before
 and after; original small-caps have been raised to uppercase.




 [Illustration: TUFFY TODD.]

 TUFFY TODD'S ADVENTURE.

 _A TRUE STORY_,

 BY SAMUEL DOGGEREL, ESQUIRE,
 OF PHILADELPHIA.

 PRINTED FOR
 _Private Circulation_.

 COPYRIGHT 1886 BY GEORGE BARRIE.




 TO

 MR. and MRS. ORRIN TODD,

 IN GRATEFUL MEMORY OF THE HAPPY HOURS SPENT
 AT HILLSIDE HOME,

 AND TO

 THE HIGHLY VALUED FRIENDS GATHERED FOR A TIME
 UNDER THE SAME HOSPITABLE ROOF-TREE,

 _The accompanying Rhymes are affectionately dedicated by_
 THE AUTHOR.




 INTRODUCTORY NOTE.

 "TUFFY TODD'S ADVENTURE" is the record of
 an incident which actually occurred during the
 past summer while the writer was spending his
 vacation in a retired but charming part of the
 Catskill Mountains.

 It was written for the amusement of the guests
 at TODD'S "Hillside Home," to whom the facts as
 set forth were familiar, and who will recognize in
 the following lines the story as it originally appeared
 in the so-called _Dry Brook Evening Mail_.

 S. D.

 Philadelphia, Nov. 22, 1886.




  TUFFY TODD'S ADVENTURE.


  There is a little dog whose name
  Is Tuffy Todd, who has the same
  Wise look as many a dog you've met;
  And is a well-bred house-dog pet,
  But quaintly called in rhyme a hound,
  To please the poet's ear for sound.
  Round as a mole, he's fat and fair,
  And robed in coat of whitest hair;
  His soft brown eyes are bright and clear,
  His little ears are quick to hear.
  He has a kind expressive face,
  With every feature full of grace;
  In disposition meek and mild,
  He's gentle as a little child;
  But has his own peculiar way,
  As all who hear will surely say.

  He is to people so polite,
  You'd think he'd never bark or bite,
  But strangers climbing up the hill
  Will shout in vain: "You hound, be still!"
  And traveler late in midnight dark
  Is sure to hear Tuff's loudest bark,
  While tramps who come about the yard
  Must flee or face a valiant guard.

  Although he has a host of friends,
  To them he rarely condescends,
  And their caresses kindly made
  Are with indifference coldly paid.
  He lives for Master Orrin Todd
  And worships him as household god;
  With him Tuff wildly romps and plays,
  And from his side but seldom strays.
  At times when Orrin goes away
  To tarry but a single day,
  He bids his Tuffy stay behind
  And try to have a peaceful mind.
  But Tuff, so sad and desolate,
  Lies down alone to meditate;
  Or seeks the porch--a sunny place--
  To watch for Todd's returning face,
  Or wait until the voice so dear
  Shall fall like music on his ear.
  Unmoved by other sight or sound
  He lies as if in thought profound.
  Call him, he seems both deaf and dumb
  Unless you say: "Ho! _Orrin's_ come!"
  When quick, like one from sleep, he springs,
  And flies, as swift as bird on wings,
  To meet his master and his friend,--
  Then Tuffy's mourning has an end.
  His ways eccentric may appear,
  But in the sequel they'll be clear.

  Now little Tuff, it may seem strange,
  Had lived at home, nor thought of change;
  But one calm morning clear and bright,
  As if new visions filled his sight,
  To _Griffin's Corners_ begged a ride
  In Orrin's wagon by his side.
  Good Master Todd could not deny
  The pleading of poor Tuffy's eye,
  And said: "Jump in and take a seat,
  And you shall have a royal treat;
  For though we go by mountain road
  And do not want a heavy load,
  Our sprightly horses strong and true
  Will never mind a mite like you."
  Then Tuff leaped in and sat erect
  As if to show his intellect,
  When off they rode with hearts of glee,
  And warmer friends you rarely see.

  Now Orrin thought it would be nice
  To give his Tuffy some advice:
  "Be careful, Tuffy mine," said he,
  "We go where many dangers be;
  Turn not aside nor leave my track
  Till setting sun shall warn us back.
  In town you will a stranger be;
  Again I say: Go not from me."
  To which the simple dog replied:
  "Oh, never will I leave thy side,
  But follow where thy footsteps lead,
  Thou dearest friend in time of need."
  (Our Tuff can talk like dogs of old
  Of whom in fable Æsop told.)

  Then Todd, to pass away the time,
  Thus entertained his guest in rhyme:
  "I've always made you stay at home
  And never let you widely roam,
  Because I feared you might be lost
  And by the world be rudely tossed;
  Or lest in some unlucky way
  You might be hurt as on that day--
  That doleful, direful day,--when life
  And death seemed balanced in the strife.
  You then were but a little pup,
  And with a snail could scarce keep up,
  But seeing Flora's gentle pace,
  You thought with her you'd run a race!
  And as she moved along the road
  And pulled with care her heavy load,
  You chanced to fall beneath the wheel
  Which crushed your leg and made you reel.
  O dreadful sight! O fearful cry!
  A mangled limb! no surgeon nigh!
  I stanched the blood which freely flowed,
  And in my arms--a tiny load--
  I bore you safely to our door;
  Then said: 'You shall go out no more
  Until your leg is fully healed,
  Or death shall take you from the field!'
  I set and bandaged well your limb,
  (Should surgeon doubt, I'd challenge him,)
  And laid you on an easy bed
  And saw that you were kindly fed.
  I closely watched you night and day
  And did not fail for you to pray!
  When you had reached the third long week,
  Thank God! (with reverence do I speak)
  'Twas plain you needed nothing more
  Than just to walk about the floor.
  At length, when people thought you dead,
  You left your room and little bed;
  "He's _tough_," they said, "as hickory rod,"
  And called you "_Tough_," then Tuffy Todd;
  And thus you see it strangely came
  You have a soft and pretty name.
  Now since to perfect health restored,
  To thank me well you can afford."

  Tuff answered: "Do you doubt, dear friend,
  That I shall thank you to the end?
  Since I was struck by wheel so rude,
  Have I not shown you gratitude?
  Have I not always been to you
  Obedient, faithful, good and true?
  Through evil and through good report
  I've never failed in my support!
  Forsaking friends, let none deny
  For you I've lived, for you I'll die;
  What care I for the world around
  When all my joy in you is found?
  Please pardon if too bold I seem
  And hold me firm in your esteem."

  "I did not mean to grieve your heart,
  Good Tuff, nor cause a single smart,
  But just to have a little play,
  I thought I'd see what you would say
  In answer to my sober talk,
  While slow the horses onward walk."

  Conversing thus as friend with friend,
  At last they reach their journey's end.
  Todd's heart with anxious fears beset,
  Foreboding peril to his pet,
  He turns to Tuffy: "You've been warned
  In language clear and unadorned,
  To stay by me and to beware
  Of dangers lurking everywhere.
  Although no prophet born or bred,
  Though on my mind no light is shed,
  I fear from knowledge of your race,
  _The day will end in your disgrace_."

  Out jumped brave Tuff and Farmer Todd,
  But scarce had gone a single rod
  Before they heard: "Bow-wow! Friend Tuff!
  For that's your name I'm sure enough;
  How glad I am to see your face
  And give to you a friend's embrace;
  Now while in town, stay thou with me,
  And boon companions we will be."
  Then Tuff, (poor "Innocent abroad,"
  Who never dreamed of any fraud,)
  Replied: "Perhaps we've met before,
  I'll take your word and ask no more:
  It would not seem polite, I know,
  Should I refuse with you to go."
  Away they marched, as large as life,
  Their hearts with hope and pleasure rife,
  And wandered in their heedless play,
  Through many a dark and devious way.
  Unchecked they raced and chased around,
  A lawless cur and recreant hound;
  They took no note of time, nor cared
  How far they strayed nor how they fared;
  For Tuff could not foresee his woes
  Till darkness did around him close.

  Oh, Tuffy, born and reared in ease,
  With bread enough to eat and cheese,
  Where now thy master's tender care?
  Where now the bed thou erst didst share?
  Thy new-made friend all false will be
  In time of thy adversity!
  Upon the cold, cold ground to-night
  No sleep shall come ere morning light,
  Nor morsel sweet for hungry maw,
  Nor peace for nature's broken law!

  The westering sun had low declined,
  When homeward with an easy mind
  Good Orrin turned his horses' feet,
  Expecting there his dog to meet;
  But drawing near, no Tuff was found
  To greet him with accustomed sound.
  Poor Orrin could not sleep a wink,
  But lay awake all night to think
  How sad the fate of Tuff might be,
  Who late was in prosperity.

  Back, in the early morning bright,
  To Griffin's Orrin took his flight,
  But thoughts of Tuff so filled his mind
  No other thought a place could find,
  And as he passed each neighbor's door
  'Twas little known the load he bore.
  The dogs ran out and barked so bold
  They wakened echoes in the wold,
  While ducks and geese joined in the strife
  And quacked and screamed for their dear life.
  Then proudly crowed vain chanticleer:
  "I am, you see, without a peer,
  Let none within my realm intrude
  To scare my hens and little brood."
  But patient kine in farmyard pent
  Were mute with meek-eyed wonderment,
  While grazing sheep on hillside near,
  Heard all and said: "We need not fear;"
  Each mother called her own dear lamb,
  Who answered back: "Oh, here I am!"
  The squirrel with his nimble feet
  Now quickly found a safe retreat,
  And from the wall, or limb on high,
  Peeped slyly out as Todd went by.
  The birds from out the leafy trees,
  So gently swayed by morning breeze,
  Poured forth their notes in merry lay
  And sang: "Good speed and happy day!"
  And insect world, on joyous wing,
  In sunlight clear did sweetly sing,
  Or hum in myriad tones so gay:
  "We cheer the traveler on his way."
  But ferns and flowers in wayside beds
  With meek surprise did lift their heads
  And whisper low: "Our friend's in haste
  And has no time on us to waste.
  In days gone by he'd stop awhile
  To praise our charms and make us smile,
  Or take us in his gentle hands
  As if rare gifts from foreign lands."

  And thus each loving, living thing
  Had kindly thought or word to bring,
  Which proved a balm to soothe Todd's soul
  As he moved onward to his goal.

  The livelong day through street and lane
  He sought his dog, but sought in vain;
  From house to house he asked each man,
  "Where's Tuff? Pray tell me if you can."
  "Why, Tuff has gone with Bruno Brown,
  A dog," they said, "of poor renown."
  It was enough to turn one's brain
  To always hear this sad refrain.

  Retracing now in twilight drear
  His weary steps, Todd dropped a tear
  And took with heavy heart the way
  His feet had pressed at opening day,
  And walked in doubt and gloom along
  Where late he sang his cheerful song,--
  Where frisked his faithful dog with glee
  And kept him joyful company.

  Poor Tuff, a wanderer forlorn,
  Now loud bewailed that he was born!

  For though in darkness and in grief,
  There came no friend to his relief.
  But being born he did not care
  Just then to die. With reason rare,
  He searched along the dusty ground
  To see where footprints could be found,
  When he with keen instinctive nose
  Discerned the course of Orrin's toes!

  Then light and hope began to rise
  And cheer the darkness of his skies,
  While slow he kept the lonely road
  Which led him safe to his abode.
  Scarce twelve had struck the kitchen clock
  When lo! was heard a scratch or knock.
  "Oh!" said his wife: "Oh, Orrin dear!
  _The lost is found; our Tuff is here!_"
  Then up sprang Orrin with a bound,
  And welcomed home his truant hound,
  Whose downcast eye and trembling frame
  Betrayed a sense of guilt and shame.

  But Todd in sweet forgiving mood
  Spread Tuff a couch and gave him food,
  And bade him now find rest in sleep,
  And thus forget his sorrows deep.
  Then Tuff in silence ate his meal,
  But made by looks this sad appeal:
  "Oh friend, in sorrow and in cheer,
  There's none on earth as you so dear;
  For all the trouble I have brought
  I am not worthy of your thought,
  And would receive a just return
  Should you my presence coldly spurn,
  Or from me turn with angry frown
  And let me in despair sink down.
  I will not plead in self-defence
  Nor try to prove my innocence,
  But truth requires that I should say
  How I was duped and led astray
  By cunning dog, who boldly claimed
  He'd seen my home ere I was named--
  Had heard of Tuffy Todd before
  When passing by our cottage door!
  He led me captive at his will
  And made me suffer direst ill,
  Which was no more than I deserved,
  Who from the path of duty swerved.
  I have my sins and woes confessed,
  And ask forgiveness, peace and rest.
  Oh grant the mercy which I crave
  Or I shall find an early grave!"

  To such petition all unused,
  With faltering words and eyes suffused,
  Kind Orrin made this brief reply:
  "The same true friends are you and I;
  As we have ever been before
  We will be now and evermore.
  And since you mourn this first offence
  With deep and humble penitence,
  I grant forgiveness full and free,
  And trust no lapse again to see."

  To banish care and doubt and fear
  And waken hope and faith and cheer,
  Good Orrin, with a tact supreme,
  From great to small then changed his theme.
  "My dog," quoth he, "with morning sun
  I'll see what can for you be done.
  There comes just now this happy thought--
  For you a collar shall be bought,
  That if perchance you go astray
  You will be known, though far away.
  On it must be inscribed your name
  And Latin words to give you fame!
  _Nil desperandum_, they shall be,
  And from despair may you be free!"

  What more did pass between these friends,
  The curtain now around descends;
  Their mutual joys, their mutual woes,
  The poet's pen may not disclose.
  To dog and master, both so true,
  Long life and peace, and our adieu.

  Now turning from the gay or sad,
  This moral we will simply add:
  Ye maidens fair and comely youth,
  Accept the words of love and truth:
  _Not all is gold with golden gleam,_
  _Not all are friends who friendly seem;_
  _The_ TRIED, _the_ TRUSTED _and the_ TRUE,
  _These are the friends we name for you._




